document expression aggregator (#14497)
apache/druid: docs/querying/aggregations.md

### Sum aggregators

| Property | Description | Required |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | Must be "longSum", "doubleSum", or "floatSum". | Yes |
| `name` | Output name for the summed value. | Yes |

> | `fieldName` | Name of the input column to sum over. At most one of `fieldName` or `expression` must be defined. | No |

Author: is that clear enough that it is an error to define both?

For these reasons, we have deprecated this aggregator and recommend using the DataSketches Quantiles aggregator instead for new and existing use cases, although we will continue to support Approximate Histogram for backwards compatibility.

> ## Expression aggregators

Reviewer: Do we need to list both the expression aggregator and the JavaScript aggregator under Expression aggregators? Can we  remove line 393 and change line 395 to H2 (## Expression aggregator)? If so, you can add an H3 section called Examples and list all of the expression aggregator examples there. 
For example:

## Expression aggregator
### Examples
## JavaScript aggregator

Author: I'm just wondering is the JavaScript agg worth it's own section? It's not enabled by default due to security issues

Reviewer: What about "Expression aggregations" for H2 and then "Expression aggregator" and "JavaScript aggregator"? So something like this:

H2 Expression aggregations
H3 Expression aggregator
H4 Examples
H3 JavaScript aggregator
H4 Example

> ### Expression aggregator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think the heading on line 393 is sufficient.

Author: i considered both this aggregator and the javascript aggregator as free form "expression" aggregators since you can just write whatever functions you want, which is why they are both under the category. can you think of a better category name than "Expression aggregators"? The native expression aggregator and javascript aggregator are totally separate, just similar in spirit...

Reviewer: What about "Expression aggregations"? For example:
H2 Expression aggregations
H3 Expression aggregator
H4 Examples
H3 JavaScript aggregator
H4 Example

> Query time only aggregator that can aggregate results using [Druid expressions](./math-expr.md) functions to facilitate building custom functions.

Reviewer: I think it would be helpful to show the expression aggregator here. Similar to what you have for the JavaScript aggregator on line 478.

Author: i don't really understand, there are several real examples of the expression aggregator after the table, and the table seems a more suitable place to explain the syntax rather than a pseudo json example like the javascript aggregator uses...

Author: I think it would probably be better if _all_ of the aggregators on this page had a table syntax form and then saved the json for realistic examples, but .. i wasn't very motivated to fix the whole page 😅

Reviewer: Works for me. Fixing the whole page is quite an undertaking :)

Author: eh, i think maybe i will just try to fix the whole page once i get around to fixing up this PR based on review, seems like it won't be _that_ bad

> | property | description | required |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Property** | **Description** | **Required** |
```

> | property | description | required |

Reviewer: The rows of the **Required** column should say Yes or No instead of true or false.
For example:
| `type` | Must be `expression`. | Yes |

| --- | --- | --- |

> | `type` | must be `expression` | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `type` | Must be `expression`. | true |
```

> | `name` | aggregator output name | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `name` | The aggregator output name. | true |
```

> | `fields` | list of aggregator input columns | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `fields` | The list of aggregator input columns. | true |
```

> | `accumulatorIdentifier` | variable which identifies the accumulator value in the `fold` and `combine` expressions | false (default `__acc`)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `accumulatorIdentifier` | The variable which identifies the accumulator value in the `fold` and `combine` expressions. | false (default `__acc`)|
```

> | `fold` | expression to accumulate values from `fields`. The result of the expression will be stored in `accumulatorIdentifier` and available to the next computation. | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `fold` | The expression to accumulate values from `fields`. The result of the expression is stored in `accumulatorIdentifier` and available to the next computation. | true |
```

> | `combine` | expression to combine the results of various `fold` expressions of each segment when merging results. If not defined and `fold` has a single input column in `fields`, then the `fold` expression may be used, otherwise the input is available to the expression as the `name`| false (default to `fold` expression if and only if the expression has a single input in `fields`)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `combine` | The expression to combine the results of various `fold` expressions of each segment when merging results. You can use the `fold` expression if `combine` is not defined and `fold` has a single input column in `fields`. Otherwise, the input is available to the expression as `name`.| false (Defaults to `fold` expression if the expression has a single input in `fields`.)|
```

> | `compare` | comparator expression which can only refer to 2 input variables, `o1` and `o2`, where `o1` and `o2` are the output of `fold` or `combine` expressions, and must adhere to the Java comparator contract. If not set, this will try to fall back to an output type appropriate comparator | false |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `compare` | The comparator expression which can only refer to two input variables, `o1` and `o2`. `o1` and `o2` represent the output of `fold` or `combine` expressions and must adhere to the Java comparator contract. If not set, `compare` will try to fall back to an output type appropriate comparator. | false |
```
What do you mean by "try to fall back"? What happens if it doesn't fall back?

> | `finalize` | finalize expression which can only refer to a single input variable, `o`, and is used to perform any final transformation of the output of `fold` or `combine` expressions. If not set, then the value is not transformed | false |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `finalize` | The finalize expression which can only refer to a single input variable, `o`. You use `finalize` to perform final transformation of the output of `fold` or `combine` expressions. If not set, the value is not transformed. | false |
```

> | `initialValue` | initial value of the accumulator for `fold` (and `combine`, if `InitialCombineValue` is null) expression | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `initialValue` | The initial value of the accumulator for `fold` (and `combine`, if `InitialCombineValue` is null) expression. | true |
```

> | `initialValue` | initial value of the accumulator for `fold` (and `combine`, if `InitialCombineValue` is null) expression | true |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `initialValue` | initial value of the accumulator for the `fold` (and `combine`, if `InitialCombineValue` is null) expression | true |
```

> | `initialCombineValue` | initial value of the accumulator for `combine` expression | false (default `initialValue`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `initialCombineValue` | The initial value of the accumulator for the `combine` expression. | false (defaults to  `initialValue`) |
```

> | `isNullUnlessAggregated` | indicates that the default output value should be `null` if the aggregator does not process any rows. If true, the value is `null`, if false, the result of running the expressions with initial values is used instead. | false (defaults to value of `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull`)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `isNullUnlessAggregated` | Indicates that the default output value should be `null` if the aggregator does not process any rows. If true, the value is `null`, if false, the result of running the expressions with initial values is used instead. | false (defaults to the value of `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull`)|
```

> | `shouldAggregateNullInputs` | indicates if the `fold` expression should operate on any `null` input values | false (default value is `true`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `shouldAggregateNullInputs` | Indicates that the `fold` expression should operate on any `null` input values. | No (defaults to `true`) |
```

> | `shouldCombineAggregateNullInputs` | indicates if the `combine` expression should operate on any `null` input values | false (default value is `shouldAggregateNullInputs`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `shouldCombineAggregateNullInputs` | Indicates if the `combine` expression should operate on any `null` input values. | false (defaults to `shouldAggregateNullInputs`) |
```

> | `maxSizeBytes` | maximum size in bytes that variably sized aggregator output types such as strings and arrays are allowed to grow before the aggregation will fail. | false (8192 bytes) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `maxSizeBytes` | The maximum size in bytes that variably sized aggregator output types such as strings and arrays are allowed to grow to before the aggregation fails. | false (8192 bytes) |
```

```json
{
  "type": "expression",
  "name": "expression_cardinality",
  "fields": ["column_a"],
  "initialValue": "hyper_unique()",
  "fold": "hyper_unique_add(column_a, __acc)",
  "combine": "hyper_unique_add(expression_cardinality, __acc)",
  "finalize": "hyper_unique_estimate(o)"
}
```

### JavaScript aggregator

Computes an arbitrary JavaScript function over a set of columns (both metrics and dimensions are allowed). Your
JavaScript functions are expected to return floating-point values.

```json
{ "type": "javascript",
  "name": "<output_name>",
  "fieldNames"  : [ <column1>, <column2>, ... ],
  "fnAggregate" : "function(current, column1, column2, ...) {
                     <updates partial aggregate (current) based on the current row values>
                     return <updated partial aggregate>
                   }",
  "fnCombine"   : "function(partialA, partialB) { return <combined partial results>; }",
  "fnReset"     : "function()                   { return <initial value>; }"
}
```

> **Example**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

```json
{
  "type": "javascript",
  "name": "sum(log(x)*y) + 10",
  "fieldNames": ["x", "y"],
  "fnAggregate" : "function(current, a, b)      { return current + (Math.log(a) * b); }",
  "fnCombine"   : "function(partialA, partialB) { return partialA + partialB; }",
  "fnReset"     : "function()                   { return 10; }"
}
```

> > JavaScript-based functionality is disabled by default. Please refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> JavaScript-based functionality is disabled by default. Refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.
```

Author: this isn't new, i just moved it, but i can adjust it...

For these reasons, we have deprecated this aggregator and recommend using the DataSketches Quantiles aggregator instead for new and existing use cases, although we will continue to support Approximate Histogram for backwards compatibility.

## Expression aggregations

### Expression aggregator

> Query time only aggregator that can aggregate results using [Druid expressions](./math-expr.md) functions to facilitate building custom functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregator applicable only at query time. Aggregates results using [Druid expressions](./math-expr.md) to facilitate building custom functions.
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | Must be "expression". | Yes |
| `name` | The aggregator output name. | Yes |
| `fields` | The list of aggregator input columns. | Yes |
| `accumulatorIdentifier` | The variable which identifies the accumulator value in the `fold` and `combine` expressions. | No (default `__acc`)|
| `fold` | The expression to accumulate values from `fields`. The result of the expression will be stored in `accumulatorIdentifier` and available to the next computation. | Yes |

> | `combine` | The expression to combine the results of various `fold` expressions of each segment when merging results. The input is available to the expression as a variable identified by the `name`. | No (default to `fold` expression if and only if the expression has a single input in `fields`)|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `combine` | The expression to combine the results of various `fold` expressions of each segment when merging results. The input is available to the expression as a variable identified by the `name`. | No. Default is `fold` expression if the expression has a single input in `fields`)|
```

| `finalize` | The finalize expression which can only refer to a single input variable, `o`. This expression is used to perform any final transformation of the output of the `fold` or `combine` expressions. If not set, then the value is not transformed. | No |
| `initialValue` | The initial value of the accumulator for the `fold` (and `combine`, if `InitialCombineValue` is null) expression. | Yes |
| `initialCombineValue` | The initial value of the accumulator for the `combine` expression. | No (default `initialValue`) |
| `isNullUnlessAggregated` | Indicates that the default output value should be `null` if the aggregator does not process any rows. If true, the value is `null`, if false, the result of running the expressions with initial values is used instead. | No (defaults to the value of `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull`)|
| `shouldAggregateNullInputs` | Indicates if the `fold` expression should operate on any `null` input values. | No (defaults to `true`) |
| `shouldCombineAggregateNullInputs` | Indicates if the `combine` expression should operate on any `null` input values. | No (defaults to the value of `shouldAggregateNullInputs`) |

> | `maxSizeBytes` | Maximum size in bytes that variably sized aggregator output types such as strings and arrays are allowed to grow to before the aggregation fails. | No (8192 bytes) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `maxSizeBytes` | Maximum size in bytes that variably sized aggregator output types such as strings and arrays are allowed to grow to before the aggregation fails. | No. Default is 8192 bytes. |
```

#### Example: a "count" aggregator
The initial value is `0` and adds `1` for each row processed.

```json
{
  "type": "expression",
  "name": "expression_count",
  "fields": [],
  "initialValue": "0",
  "fold": "__acc + 1",
  "combine": "__acc + expression_count"
}
```

#### Example: a "sum" aggregator

> The initial value is `0`, adds the numeric value `column_a` for each row processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial value is `0`. `fold` adds the numeric value `column_a` for each row processed.
```

```json
{
  "type": "expression",
  "name": "expression_sum",
  "fields": ["column_a"],
  "initialValue": "0",
  "fold": "__acc + column_a"
}
```

#### Example: a "distinct array element" aggregator, sorted by array_length

> The initial value is an empty array, `fold` adds the elements of `column_a` to the accumulator using set semantics, `combine` merges the sets, and `compare` orders the values by `array_length`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial value is an empty array. `fold` adds the elements of `column_a` to the accumulator using set semantics, `combine` merges the sets, and `compare` orders the values by `array_length`.
```

```json
{
  "type": "expression",
  "name": "expression_array_agg_distinct",
  "fields": ["column_a"],
  "initialValue": "[]",
  "fold": "array_set_add(__acc, column_a)",
  "combine": "array_set_add_all(__acc, expression_array_agg_distinct)",
  "compare": "if(array_length(o1) > array_length(o2), 1, if (array_length(o1) == array_length(o2), 0, -1))"
}
```

#### Example: an "approximate count" aggregator using the built-in hyper-unique

> Similar to the 'cardinality' aggregator, the default value is an empty hyper-unique sketch, `fold` adds the value of `column_a` to the sketch, `combine` merges the sketches, and `finalize` gets the estimated count from the accumulated sketch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the cardinality aggregator, the default value is an empty hyper-unique sketch, `fold` adds the value of `column_a` to the sketch, `combine` merges the sketches, and `finalize` gets the estimated count from the accumulated sketch.
```

```json
{
  "type": "expression",
  "name": "expression_cardinality",
  "fields": ["column_a"],
  "initialValue": "hyper_unique()",
  "fold": "hyper_unique_add(column_a, __acc)",
  "combine": "hyper_unique_add(expression_cardinality, __acc)",
  "finalize": "hyper_unique_estimate(o)"
}
```

### JavaScript aggregator

Computes an arbitrary JavaScript function over a set of columns (both metrics and dimensions are allowed). Your
JavaScript functions are expected to return floating-point values.

| Property | Description | Required |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | Must be "javascript". | Yes |
| `name` | The aggregator output name. | Yes |
| `fieldNames` | The list of aggregator input columns. | Yes |

> | `fnAggregate` | Javascript function that updates partial aggregate based on the current row values, and returns the updated partial aggregate. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `fnAggregate` | JavaScript function that updates partial aggregate based on the current row values, and returns the updated partial aggregate. | Yes |
```

> | `fnCombine` | Javascript function to combine partial aggregates and return the combined result. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `fnCombine` | JavaScript function to combine partial aggregates and return the combined result. | Yes |
```

> | `fnReset` | Javascript function that returns the 'initial' value. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `fnReset` | JavaScript function that returns the 'initial' value. | Yes |
```

#### Example

```json
{
  "type": "javascript",
  "name": "sum(log(x)*y) + 10",
  "fieldNames": ["x", "y"],
  "fnAggregate" : "function(current, a, b)      { return current + (Math.log(a) * b); }",
  "fnCombine"   : "function(partialA, partialB) { return partialA + partialB; }",
  "fnReset"     : "function()                   { return 10; }"
}
```

> > JavaScript-based functionality is disabled by default. Refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> JavaScript functionality is disabled by default. Refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.
```

This makes it possible to compute the results of a filtered and an unfiltered aggregation simultaneously, without having to issue multiple queries, and use both results as part of post-aggregations.

> If only the filtered results are required, consider putting the filter on the query itself, which will be much faster since it does not require scanning all the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If only the filtered results are required, consider putting the filter on the query itself. This will be much faster because it does not require scanning all the data.
```

> *Note:* If only the filtered results are required, consider putting the filter on the query itself, which will be much faster since it does not require scanning all the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If only the filtered results are required, consider putting the filter on the query itself, which will be much faster since it does not require scanning all the data.
```

each output row that lets you infer whether a particular dimension is included in the sub-grouping used for that row. You can pass
a *non-empty* list of dimensions to this aggregator which *must* be a subset of dimensions that you are grouping on. 

| Property | Description | Required |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | Must be "grouping". | Yes |
| `name` | The aggregator output name. | Yes |
| `groupings` | The list of columns to use in the grouping set. | Yes |

> For example, if the aggregator has `["dim1", "dim2"]` as input dimensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following aggregator has `["dim1", "dim2"]` as input dimensions:
```json
{ "type" : "grouping", "name" : "someGrouping", "groupings" : ["dim1", "dim2"] }
```

If you use this aggregator in a query with `[["dim1", "dim2"], ["dim1"], ["dim2"], []]` as subtotals, the aggregator produces the following output:
```
